This is an interview with Ron Essig by Mary Cook on
November 25, 1988, at the home of Ron Essig. In the
interest of accumulating knowledge about the
war, I am going to donate this tape to the Texas A&M
Oral History Collection and the University
Archives. Is that all right with you? Mm-hmm.
Okay. Okay, the first question is, where were you
born? Reading, Pennsylvania. Okay. And when were
you born? What year? 1948. And where did you go to
school? Wilson High School, West Long,
Pennsylvania. Okay. And did you attend college?
No. And when and where did you join the military? I
joined it in Pennsylvania in August of 1966. And
what was the reason for joining the military?
There was no main reason. I just went and joined.
Did you join... Because of Vietnam? No, that had
nothing to do with it. And what was the extent of
your military training before arriving in
Vietnam? Well, I took my basic training. I took
helicopter training in Fort Rucker, Alabama, and
then from there I went right to Vietnam. And what
were your feelings when you found out you were
being sent to Vietnam?
Well, I was scared at first, but... There was
nothing I could do about it, so I went.
And what were the sentiments, did you feel, in the
country at the time that you were sent to Vietnam,
as far as what were... Did you feel there was a lot of
anti-war sentiment at the time? Was it prevalent
in Pennsylvania, or...? Not really. When I went to
Vietnam, it really wasn't that much. So it was
still a positive attitude. Right. We felt we
should be in Vietnam. Right. After I was over
there, that's when it really got started.
Okay. What was your initial reaction upon
arriving in Vietnam? Well, it wasn't what I
expected. I expected to see bullets flying, but it
was nothing like that. I mean, where I reported
into in Vietnam was... what they called a coal
area. It was an induction center. And I was there
about four days before I got sent to my company. I
really didn't see any action until I was there
about a month, I guess, when we first finally got
hit by mortars. And where were you? What part of
Vietnam were you at the time? In the northern part,
in the highlands, at Da Nang.
Da Nang. Did you, were you around the people, the
Vietnamese people at all? How did you feel about
the people? Around the Vietnamese people all the
time. They, well, I was just amazed how the people
lived. You know, it was such a poor country. And I
just couldn't comprehend how they could live the
way they did. You know, of course, being, you know,
from the United States and everything, we had
everything we wanted. And then going to a country
like that where it was so poor and their way of life,
I just took a while for it to sink in. Did you try, I
don't know, some units, we've had people talk to
us, some of the men would help the villagers or the
natives around where they were as far as the
different things to improve their living. Were
you involved with that at all? No, our company was.
We were an aviation company.
Okay, do you feel you understood the Vietnamese
people and their culture at all? Do you feel you
understood why they lived the way they did and they
were happy with the way they were living,
apparently? Oh, yeah, they were definitely
happy. Well, I mean, it was their way of life.
Right. As far as the war... No, they weren't happy
with that. Was it because we were there? Were they
not happy with our presence? Would they have
rather fought the war themselves? No, I didn't
take it that way. I'm
cut for words now.
I never felt that much hatred toward the American
GI while I was there.
In a sense, you know, they were glad that we were
there helping them and everything. But when it
came really down to the fighting, I mean, you get to
the soldier of the South Vietnamese Army, I felt
like he could have done more if he would have tried
harder. But as far as the civilian people,
yeah, I feel like they were pleased that we were
there. And what unit were you in? 282nd Assault
Helicopter Company. Okay. And what was your
mission? Resupply, medevac, troop lift. So you
were carrying out supplies to troops? Right. We
supported the 1st Arvin Division, the South
Vietnamese soldiers. Okay. And was that
division, the Arvin Division, did you find they
were well-trained, well-equipped to deal with
what was going on? Well... As far as the training,
no, they didn't have very good training, but they
were supplied by the United States government. I
mean, they were American weapons. Right. And how
long were you in Vietnam? A year and a half. And as
far as usually we're under the impression, or I'm
under the impression, that most people were only
over there for a year. Right. And is there a reason
why you were over there Well, when it was time for my
year was up, I had
about 16 months to go in the service yet. And I knew
if I'd come back to the States, I'd only be back a few
months and I'd have to go right back to Vietnam
again. So I just stayed an additional six months
and then came back to the States and get out of the
service when I got back.
How did you and your unit, okay, you were a supply
unit. Could you describe to me exactly what that
entailed as far as? Well, as far as supply, we'd
resupply them with weapons, ammunition, medical
supplies, food. So you'd fly out to the different
areas and drop off these supplies and then come
back to the base area, which was Da Nang? Mm-hmm.
And did you see a lot of, when
you landed, when you tried to drop off supplies and
that kind of thing, were you under fire a lot of
times or? About 50% of the time. We've seen quite a
bit of hostile fire. Okay. What was the training of
your unit? Were all the men in your unit Did they go
through the same training that you did back in the
States? No. Well, the ones that went to the
training I did were the crew chiefs and the
mechanics. And then we had gunners. They
consisted mostly of infantry. One gunner I had was
with the 1st Infantry Division, and he
transferred to the aviation unit to be a door
gunner. And that was his main duty, was just a
gunner. Take care of the guns. It was my job to
maintain the helicopter and see that it would fly.
And then while we were flying, and then I was a
gunner.
Would you say that the training that you had then
prepared you for, I mean, as far as not for the war
aspect, not for what you expected when you got
there, but... the training that you did have, you
were prepared when you were over there to do your
job, your specific job of taking care of the
helicopter. Yeah,
definitely. And going back now, going back to
different battles in Vietnam, you were over there
during Tet. What was your first reaction to Tet?
Well,
It was very hostile, I know that. When it initially
started, it wasn't too bad for me. Well, I mean, as
far as our company, the ones that were stationed at
Da Nang, we had, we kept, our main base was at Da
Nang, and we kept helicopters to the north at Way
Citadel and helicopters to the south at Quang
Ngai. And we really didn't get into the heavy
fighting of it until they more or less overran
Way... Rover ran away Citadel. And then that's
when we really had to get in some heavy fighting.
Then... So that was your unit that got into it.
Right. And I was scared then. And did you fly on
these... You were out on these missions then? Oh,
yeah. Got in some really heavy fighting then.
And... So, did you think... Well, did you know it
was coming? Did you have any idea what that tap was
going to occur? They tried to prepare us for it, but
I don't think, as far as the commanding officers in
our company, I don't think they realized it would
be as intense as it was and it would last as long as it
did, which I can't tell the exact amount of days
that it lasted, but I honestly believe that they
only figured it would last maybe five or six days.
Right. And it carried way beyond that. So it was an
intensive period of fighting for an extensive
period of time. It was fighting 24 hours a day. And
the U.S., you don't believe that the U.S. actually
knew what they were getting into when they carried
out this? Well... I think the intelligence part
probably did, but like I said, as far as the
commanding officers of the company that I was in, I
don't think they knew it was gonna be that bad.
Okay, and how did you... You said you were scared
about the fighting, the intensive fighting. How
did... What other feelings were going through
your mind? I mean... personal feelings, and this
is a difficult question, but... Well, if you're
trying to ask me, the question is, did I think we
should have been over there? No, that's a question
later on. But did you personally, at the time of
Tet, when you were doing this fighting, when you
were involved in the intensive fighting in your
unit, besides being scared, do you remember any
other feelings that were going through your mind?
Or just get out of there and get home. That's all I
was concerned about. And you had, at that time, you
had about ten, nine, nine months left, was it?
Yeah, it was about nine months. And what about your
choice to go ahead and stay over there? Did you feel
that that was... I still felt like I made the right
choice. What were the, after Tet, what was the
feeling of your unit, of the troops, of the US
troops in Vietnam? Were they more enthusiastic
because Tet was supposedly a win for us? Oh,
definitely. So they were more enthusiastic about
being in Vietnam? Yeah, I feel they were. And did it
motivate you personally, Tet? In a sense, I guess
it did, yeah. I don't know. I figured if I could make
it through that mess, I can make it through
anything and just get home and forget about it.
What was the military leadership like? What were
your commanding officers like? Were they trained
for Vietnam? Were they experienced with war? Oh,
yeah. We had... quite a number of them that were on
their second and third tours over there. You know,
they knew what it was about and they worked with the
men to make sure that they got through it.
So you feel like their leadership was adequate?
Oh, yeah.
Did they ever ask the men in your unit to do
something which you felt or the men in your unit
felt was totally unreasonable. I know in the
military there's supposedly no room for, you do
what you're told and there's no room for
questioning, but in one of the books that we had
read, and I know this wasn't in your unit, it wasn't
a duty of yours, but they were to search the tunnels
and they always had to search the tunnels. I'm just
wondering if there was anything that the
leadership in your unit told you to do that was
putting the men in your unit's life in danger more
than... Not that I really recall. Everything just
clicked along pretty smooth. Okay. Was there a
problem with drug use in your unit? Yeah, quite a
bit. Why do you think drugs were such a major factor
in the Vietnam War with men? I think a lot of guys
feared they had to have it to get through it. So it
was a crutch. It was a big hide to them. It just, I
don't know, maybe made them face reality or
something. I don't know. Marijuana was a big
demand. Marijuana. Yeah. Were other drugs in use
at the time? Not that I know of. And it was readily
available? Oh, yeah. You just go downtown and buy
that like you buy a pack of cigarettes. And what
about the commanding officers? They obviously
knew. Oh, sure they knew. And did they use it also?
That I really don't know. I've never seen them do
it. But What they did on their free time was their
business.
Okay. Was there, okay, you said this was in some of
the commanding officers, this was their second or
third tour. Was that because of careerism? Were
they in the military as a career? Yeah.
And did you? were you aware of or did you see any
altering of official reports? In some instances,
as in body counts, body counts were upped as far as
the enemy. Conditions weren't reported as being
as bad as they were. Some conditions were reported
very optimistically in order for their
backgrounds to look better. Did you see that
happening? I haven't seen it happen, no.
Do you have any particular operation which you
consider the least successful of your unit?
Not really. It seemed like everything we did was,
well, to me, everything we did seemed successful.
I mean, we never lost that many people.
Not while I was over there. And what happened
before I was there or after I was there, I really
don't know. Right. I mean, we lost some people, but
we didn't lose that many. So, you know, if you go out
on a mission and come back with as many people going
out, it was a success. Right. And you consider the
number of people you lost to be? It was a minimum.
Minimum. Okay. And is there any particular
mission you consider the most successful? Or
would you just write them all down? I'd read them
all about the same, really. About the same.
Okay, and you were, when we were talking about the
Vietnamese, and you said, you, did you feel like
you understood the Vietnamese as far as the people
go? You said you did not. Was that correct? I mean,
as far as, because you didn't understand why they
lived the way they did. Well, I knew why they lived
the way they did, because they were poor. It was a
poor country. It was communism. But they seemed
happy living that way. That's how they lived all
their life. Okay. How did you feel about the Arvin?
They were lazy. Really. You know, like I said
earlier, their training could have been a lot
better.
Do you blame their lack of training on their lack of
ambition? Yeah. Because if we take a troop lift
out, We drop off the first wave of troops, go back up
and pick the second wave up, and we come right back
to where we were the first ones. The first one was
still sitting there. I mean, they didn't even make
an effort to move. It looked like they were just
going out on a camping trip. That was it. They were
already cooking their rice, so, you know, there
was definitely a lack of effort.
And do you feel like we should have just, you said
they're lazy, do you feel, I mean, you were out
there, you were putting your life on the line, and
you dropped them off and they'd sit there. I mean,
did you feel like you should have just said, well,
bye, I'm going home and left? I mean, you know, do
you feel like we should have just said bye and let
them fight their own war and take care of it the way
they wanted to? Well, at first I didn't think that,
but when it came close to the end of my tour, then I
realized what was going on. So after you've been
over there over a year. Right, you know, when
you're there your first six months, you know, you
have to be there that long to see what's really
going on. You just can't see it in one or two days.
But when it came close to the end of my tour, I
just... I figured it was just a waste, which it
really was. So,
basically, I guess the next question is, do you
resent putting your life on the line? Do you resent
the time that you spent 18 months over there? The
first six months, it took you six months to figure
out what was going on. Then you dropped these men
off. They didn't do what they were supposed to do.
We were over there, we were supplying them,
equipping them, spending millions, millions of
dollars. Do you resent being over there? Do you
resent that 18 months of your life? No, I don't
resent being there. I did something I had to do. The
United States government said, hey, you're going
to Vietnam, and that was it. So I served my time just
like anybody else did. There was no sense in
protesting it. It wouldn't do no good. So I did my
duty and that was it. How do you feel, or how did you
feel about the North Vietnamese Army? How, what
were their, do you feel like they were that much
better trained, equipped than the South? Well,
they were trained better. They were much more
disciplined.
When it came up to Ted, and they started coming down
from the north, I mean they were, they were running
short on troops and stuff. I mean they were sending
12, 13 year old children down to fight. But they
were still disciplined. They did what they were
told to do. And as far as their weapons, yeah I think
they had pretty good weapons. They were all
communist made. From what we captured of them,
they seemed like pretty decent weapons. How were
they treated when they were captured? Not too
good.
Can you give me a specific?
Well, they were bounced around pretty good. You
know, if they captured three or four of them, they
wouldn't talk. They'd bounce one of them around
pretty good to make the others talk. So it was a
pretty tough interrogation they put them
through. Now, that was the Vietnamese that did the
interrogating. Now, I never saw how the Americans
interrogated them. So this was the South
Vietnamese interrogating the North? Right, the
South Vietnamese that interrogated them. They
had no mercy on them, which I'm sure it was the same
way with the North.
And how did you feel about the Viet Cong? Since you
really couldn't, how did you pick the Viet Cong?
How did you pick out Viet Cong from the Arvin? Well,
they were, the Viet Cong, they were, you could tell
them. They mostly wore black pajamas and stuff.
Where the South Vietnamese Army, they wore green
fatigues and stuff like we did. Hey, that sucker
had a gun. He was pointing it at me. It was either him
or me. Was there a lot of Arvin by day and Viet Cong by
night? That kind of thing? That I really couldn't
tell you. I don't know. There was a lot of stories
about it.
OK, now back to the President of the United States
and different policies that he had at the time.
What about during Vietnam? What about LBJ and his,
we're going to bomb only certain places and you
have to ask my permission to bomb? And it was
basically for a time, I don't know when you were
over there or how it ran, but for a time it was a nine
to five war, basically. And it was not fought
during the holidays. Right. How did you feel about
that? It was a war. I mean... Well, as far as the
bombing, I didn't agree with the way he did it.
I think if he had just went out there and bombed the
north and got it over with, it probably would have
ended a lot quicker. That's my feeling. I might be
wrong. I don't know. But as far as bombing here and
bombing there and shutting it down for so many days
and then reasonable, start the bombing again. I
didn't agree with it. Like I said, they just would
have went in there with a squadron of bombers and
unloaded on them. I think they could have stopped
it. And as far as that getting clearance to fire,
I've been through that too many times. You know,
you see something on the ground, you know it's not
right, then you have to call in for clearance to
fire and it'd take anywhere from 30 to 45 minutes to
get clearance. It's all gone. So did you always get
clearance to fire? Sometimes we did. Sometimes we
didn't.
We didn't take matters into our own hands. And you
did what you felt was right. And sometimes we'd
even have a South Vietnamese commanding officer
on board, but we'd still have to call for
clearance. We couldn't get clearance. He'd give
us a word, go ahead and fire, so we'd fire.
Was this the attitude of your whole unit? I mean,
was, as far as the policies?
Were the men in your unit, did they feel the same way
about the bombing policy and about clearing,
getting clearance to fire and that kind of thing?
Oh, yeah. The whole company felt the same about it.
What did you think about the government's role in
Vietnam as far as LBJ's policy? Later on, Nixon,
when he said he was going to withdraw troops and
then we invaded Cambodia, how did you feel
about... It was very political, the whole thing.
How did you feel about that as far as... It was more
politics running the war than the military was
running the war. Do you feel like the military...
The upper officers really had any kind of control,
or do you think they were more controlled by what
was politically happening in the United States?
It was all run from Washington. I mean, the
commanding officers, I mean, of our company, they
had to take orders from battalion. Battalion had
to take them from there higher up. So it was
definitely politics. We had no control. We had to
do what we were told to do, and that was it. Okay.
Were you aware when you were over in Vietnam of the
media involvement in the war? Did you know what was
being broadcast in the United States about the
war? Not when I was over there, I didn't. I didn't
realize it until I got home. Were there any
media... around TV reporters, camera, newspaper
photographers, that kind of thing. Did you ever
see any while you were in? No,
I never saw any. Were you aware of the anti-war
sentiment that was increasing in the United
States while you were in Vietnam? Yeah. And how did
that? My parents used to send me newspaper
clippings of it.
kind of made me mad, knowing that I was over there
trying to serve my country and then had these
protesters back in the States going against the
war. Then you had some that went to Canada trying to
avoid the war. So,
yeah, I was mad. And what did your parents say about
you being in Vietnam? Did they support you being in
Vietnam? Or when you came home, did they not want to
hear about your Vietnam experiences? Oh, they
wanted to hear about them. You know, but at first I
couldn't talk about it. I just, something I had to
get out of my mind. Now,
it was kind of tough for my parents because it was
myself and my brother, we were both over at the same
time. So it was kind of hard on my parents. But, uh,
As far as when we came back, I mean, there was no hard
feelings or anything like that. Did you, when you
came back, what was your reception? I don't know.
You went back to Pennsylvania. Mm-hmm. Were you
from a small town in Pennsylvania? No, it was a
pretty good-sized city. Pretty good-sized. And
what about the people you knew? How did they treat
you when you came back? Well, at first... I don't
know, I guess they might have thought I was going to
come back whacked out or something. I don't know.
At first they were just kind of easy. They were kind
of careful what they said and stuff. But after
I was home a while, it just more or less tapered out
like it used to be. Good old drinking buddies and
stuff. The only experience that I really had that
kind of really hit me was when I flew from
California to Pennsylvania. I was on a plane and a
woman looked at me and just, for no reason at all,
she just looked at me and called me a child
murderer. I guess because it was a Vietnam man. I
wasn't gonna let it bother me. I was going home. So
you wore your uniform from California to
Pennsylvania? And when this woman said that to
you, it was, what could you say? It was a shock at
first, you know, hey, wait a minute, I didn't kill
no kids. But that's just the way that people were.
You know, the Vietnam vet, he took a bad rap. It's
just been the last few years that they've really
been doing something for him.
You mentioned about people that chose Canada
instead of serving their country. How do you feel
about those people? If you met somebody that came
up to you and said, oh, you're a Vietnam War vet,
well, I went to Canada instead, what would you say
to that person? I don't think I'd say anything to
them. Just for the satisfaction, I'd probably
smack them in the mouth and get it over with. You
know, it was... my way of thinking he was a coward.
You know, hey, if I'm good enough to serve my
country, so is he. I lived through it. Do you think
that's part of being a citizen of the United
States, to serve your country? Even if you don't
feel the reason for... Well, I feel like it is.
...being involved is correct? Right.
When we were talking about politics involved in
the war, And the anti-war movement, do you feel the
anti-war movement was more against what was
occurring in Washington than against the
military? Do you think people were really against
the military, or is it just the government policy
at the time? I think they were against the
government. That's what I think.
And you said you wore your uniform from when you got
back into the state. And some people came back to
the States from Vietnam, some veterans. One
incident, he took his uniform off as soon as he got
into California before he went home. Some of them
have joined anti-war movements when they got back
to the States. They were not proud about their role
in Vietnam. Can you say that you are proud of your
role in Vietnam? Yeah, I was proud of what I did. I
served my country. They sent me over there to do a
job. I felt like I did a job.
Would you say that Vietnam, the reason for us being
in Vietnam and or the people were worth dying for if
you had lost or killing for when you were over
there?
As far as stopping communism, yeah, it was worth
it, but for the people that were there, and like I
said, after the way I saw how they operated, I mean,
as far as the military,
no, I can't agree with that. Not on the part of the
South Vietnamese military. If they'd have tried
harder, they could have done it. But when the
United States pulled out, they just... More or
less threw up their hands and said, hey, here we
are. That's the way it looked to me. Right. Do you
think if we would have pulled out, or if we hadn't
been over there, or we would have pulled out
sooner, do you think they would have just done the
same thing, just said, well, forget it? Yeah, I
think they
would have. What are your views on the Selective
Service, on National Guard? What about the men
that joined the National Guard instead of, well,
after a period of time, they weren't allowed in the
National Guard anyways, but...
Well, I won't hold anything against them for it.
Somebody had to go in the National Guard. Might
sound like a stupid answer, but... No, I don't hold
anything against anybody who went in the National
Guard.
And what about the Selective Service? Did you feel
like they were trained?
Did you feel like they did their job, that they were
trained
better? No. I think they did all right. I mean, they
did what they were told to do. They were trained to
do that job, and that's what they did.
And the last question is, do you think we could have
won the war?
That's a hard one to answer.
In fact, that's the first time anybody's ever
asked me that question.
Yeah, I think we could have. Well, we'll go right
back to the bombing again. If they would have
continued the bombing, And kept bombing and
bombing and bombing. Eventually, yeah, they
would have got him down to where we could have beat
him. So going back to the very, not the very
beginning, but to LBJ's getting us more involved
to his policy on bombing, if we would have just gone
over there and bombed... I think so. It would have
taken care of it. I think it would have. And we would
have been out of there a lot sooner. I feel like we
would have, yeah. Would have saved a lot more lives
too.
Okay. Is there any... Is there anything I haven't
touched on that maybe you'd like to... No, you hit a
lot more than
I thought you were going to hit. Are there any
experiences that...
Not really. How do you feel today about... I know I
said that was the last question, but... About the
movies that are out about Vietnam, there's, well,
there was Good Morning Vietnam. There's
Hamburger Hill, Platoon, Rambo. Well,
I've seen nearly all of them.
And the closest thing that I've seen in the movies
to Vietnam was Platoon. Platoon? Mm-hmm. Of
course, now that was all infantry. I didn't get
into the jungles like they did.
And that good morning Vietnam, it was... That was
more of a political... On a scale of one to ten, I
give it a zero.
But it, no, it doesn't have any effect on me. I
imagine some of these Vietnam vets it probably
does.
Well, thank you very much.